Anthony Shaw, welcome to Talk by The Enemy.
Hi Michael, good to see you again.
Yeah, it's great to have you back.
Your at least yearly appearance here.
If not by name, you know, you've at least appeared yourself once.
But I think you get mentioned a bunch of times with all the stuff you're doing.
Yeah, we were just trying to work out when was the last time.
Is it like a year, over a year ago?
Yeah, yeah, it was May 2020.
That was when the whole COVID thing was about to end.
Like, hey, it's just a couple of months, we'll be through this, it'll be fine.
Everyone will wear a mask and get their shots and it'll be totally normal.
I had to pause for a second, I was trying to work out what year it was.
[Laughter]
I know, I know.
Well, you're in Australia, so it's probably the next year.
2022, yeah.
Yeah, you guys are always ahead by a little bit.
Yeah, exactly.
Awesome.
Welcome to the show.
A lot of times we have you on to talk about stuff that's going on,
but this time we're here to talk about a project that you've been spearheading
for the last year or so, Pidgin, which is a JIT compiler for Python,
which is pretty awesome.
Yeah, it was sitting on the shelf for a few years,
and I decided to pick it up.
It was related to a thread of things I'd been working on,
looking at Python performance, and also when I kind of finished working
on the book, so I published a book.
CPython Internals book, yeah.
CPython Internals book.
Yeah, it was really interesting to dig into a compiler,
and I really wanted to put some of that theory into practice
and work on my own compiler.
So, yeah, that's kind of what led into it.
Yeah, it looks like no small feat, as people will see
as we get into it, but how much did the diving into the C internals
make you feel like, all right, I'm ready to actually start messing
with this and messing with how it runs and compiling some instruction?
Yeah, massively.
Yeah?
I don't know where I would have started otherwise.
It's a pretty steep learning curve.
If someone did that job, I'd be like, I have no idea how to do this.
Yeah, I was one of those projects I got started on
because it just had my curiosity.
I didn't understand how it could work, and, yeah,
I just really wanted to learn, and it just seemed like a really big challenge.
So, yeah, I looked at it and thought, this is an interesting thing.
I know that Brett and Dino were no longer working on it
and just decided to pick it up and see how far I could take it.
Yeah, absolutely.
I think you've taken it pretty far, and it's about to go to 1.0.
Is that right?
Yeah, so it could be launching version 1.0 of Pidgin in a few days.
So I'm waiting for .NET 6 to be released,
and I'll explain why probably a bit later.
Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait.
Hold on, hold on, hold on.
This is a Python project on a Python podcast,
and you're waiting for .NET 6?
Oh, my gosh, I don't understand.
Yeah, this bit confuses people, and it did originally, I think,
when the project was written.
So it's a JIT compiler for Python written in C++,
and you could write your own JIT compiler, which is no small feat.
Yeah, and it could be done in, like, ten years.
Exactly.
Or you can take a JIT compiler off the shelf.
So a JIT compiler compiles some sort of intermediary language
into machine code, so assembly.
And a lot of JIT compilers are working with basically, like,
which registers to use, which operations and instructions
are supported on different CPUs.
Like, there's a whole bunch of stuff to work on.
Very, very involved.
And .NET Core, what was called .NET Core is now just .NET,
and it has a JIT compiler in it.
And, yeah, you can actually use just the JIT compiler.
So that's what the project originally did,
was to basically use the JIT compiler for .NET Core.
Other JITs for Python, some of them use the LLVM JIT,
and there's a few other JITs as well you can get off the shelf.
So, yeah, started to use the .NET one.
That was originally Dino and Brett, when they built this.
It was actually before .NET Core was even released.
It was still in beta back then, but, yeah, they used .NET Core's JIT.
Yeah, I think it was a much earlier version of .NET Core back then, right?
Like, it's come a long way.
I think back then, you probably know this better than I do now,
but back then I think there was, like, a fork in the road,
two paths for the .NET world.
You could do traditional .NET on Windows only,
but that was like the 15-year polished version of .NET.
And then there was this alternative, funky, open-source .NET Core thing
that was sort of derived but was not the same thing as that.
And so I think probably when Brett and Dino were working on it,
it was really early days on that version of the JIT compiler.
Yeah, it was version 0.9 of .NET Core.
So, yeah, I did actually get involved back then,
just helping out upgrading it from version 0.9 of .NET Core to version 1.
So I did, like, help on the original Pigeon project
with some of the builds and stuff.
But that early version of Pigeon required a fork of CPython
and a fork of .NET Core.
So it required you to compile both projects from source with patches.
And, like, stick a whole bunch of stuff together.
And, yeah, very tricky to set up.
And that's one of the things when I kind of came in a year ago
to pick this project up again that I really wanted to tackle
was let's make it easy to install this,
which means it should just be pip installable.
So you can just pip install Pigeon on Python.
And that's the second thing I had to do,
upgrade it to the latest versions of Python,
the latest versions of .NET.
So, yeah, it's running on .NET 6 and CPython 3.10.
So, yeah, it's basically a JIT compiler for Python 3.10.
Right. So now we have .NET as--
I think they've closed that fork.
It's a little bit like the 2-3 boundary that we've crossed.
It's just back to this .NET thing, and it's open source, which is cool.
So that closes the .NET JIT side of things from a beta thing.
On the other hand, there's a pep,
and I'm sure you know the number.
I don't know the number off the top of my head,
that allowed for extensions into standard CPython,
so you don't have to fork it and reprogram C of L.C.
There's an extensibility layer for this kind of stuff now, right?
Yeah, so maybe to backtrack a little bit,
but when you write Python code and then execute it in CPython,
which is the most popular Python interpreter,
the one you get from python.org,
when you compile the--
Well, you don't compile the Python code.
Python does that for you.
When you compile Python code,
it compiles down into an abstract syntax tree,
and then the next level down is bytecode sequence,
which you can see if you import the disk module
and you run the disk function on your code.
I've got to talk about Pidgin,
which I did at PyCon this year.
I'll give some demos and stuff.
Perfect.
Yeah, so it gives some explanations and examples.
So that's kind of the bytecode,
and basically this looks at how the bytecode gets handed off
onto an evaluation loop in Python,
which is this--
Is that one of the first things you looked at
when you started diving into the C source code?
Is that the first file you went to?
It was one of, yeah. It's such a big one.
I remember on Python Bytes last week,
you mentioned that Lukasz had been analyzing bits of Python
that changed the most,
and that was the most changed bit of Python.
It's kind of like the brain of Python, really.
It's the loop that evaluates all the instructions
and then calls all the different C APIs
to actually make your code do things.
And what you can do in this PEP,
which Brett proposed originally when he was working on Pidgin,
was that you can actually tell CPython
to not use its own evaluation loop,
but use a replacement one.
So this PEP 523, it is.
You can basically write an extension module for Python
and then say, "Okay, from now on,
I will evaluate all Python code."
Well, Python compiles it for you
and then just gives it to you as a bytecode object
with bytecodes in it,
and then you can write a custom function
for evaluating those bytecodes.
Right, exactly.
Normally, there's just a switch statement.
It says, "If I get this bytecode, here's what I do.
If I get that bytecode, here's what I do."
One of the drawbacks of that that makes it super hard to optimize,
among other things, is it's one statement at a time.
Right?
Like the cofalc.c, that switch statement, that loop, doesn't go,
"Here's a series of possibly related opcodes.
Make that happen."
It goes, "No, you need to load this variable.
Now create this object."
There's just not a lot of room for optimization there.
You're not going to inline a function
or do other types of things when it's instruction by instruction.
Yeah, exactly.
What Pigeon does, essentially, is it implements that API.
When you install Pigeon and activate Pigeon,
which you do by importing Pigeon
and then just doing pigeon.enable,
it will tell CPython that Pigeon will be the function
to evaluate all Python code from now on.
Yeah.
When it sees a new function for the first time,
instead of interpreting all the bytecode instructions
when you execute the function,
it will basically interpret those ahead of time
and then compile them into machine code instructions
and then store that machine code in memory
and then re-execute it every time you run the function.
It basically compiles the function down into assembly, essentially,
and then puts that assembly object in memory.
Then when you run the Python function,
if it's already been compiled,
it will then just run those instructions.
Right. As standard JIT stuff, it has to do it once.
But then once it's hit one method, it's like,
"Okay, this one, here's the machine instructions for it.
We're just going to reuse that," right?
Yeah, because the computer needs machine code to do anything.
So something has to have compiled it down into machine code.
In the case of normal CPython, CPython is written in C,
and the C compiler has compiled that down into machine code.
But it's a loop that it runs through for each bytecode instruction
to go, "Okay, this is an add operator.
So I'm going to take two objects off the stack,
the left-hand side and the right-hand side,
and then I'm going to call the add function in the C API."
Exactly. Now, I kind of got you diving down deep a little too quick.
I do want to set the stage just a moment
before we get into how all of this works,
because I think understanding where you're coming from
and understanding some of the problems you're trying to solve
are really going to be helpful to seeing the value here.
So back in, what was it, April of 2020,
whatever PyCon was, that virtual PyCon, the first virtual PyCon,
you had that talk called "Why Python is Slow,"
and you talked about some interesting things that really set the stage for,
well, if you had a JIT and you had all sorts of control over it, as you do,
how could it be faster? What could we do?
So one of the things you talked about was this in-body problem,
how C++ relative to, say, Python, there was a bit of a difference there,
but also .NET Core was a lot faster,
and really importantly, JavaScript was faster.
Yeah, so that was 2019.
- Gosh. - Okay.
Yeah, this is part of this lovely pandemic.
So yeah, I covered the in-body problem, which is interesting
because it's not a--
the in-body problem is a mathematical formula
that calculates the position of the jovial planets,
and the difference in time--
It starts to get super complicated, right?
Yeah, it's basically like a big mathematical formula,
and it just loops through the iterations
to work out the position of different planets.
So it's kind of--
The difference between C is seven seconds it takes to run the algorithm in C,
and 14 minutes it takes to run it in Python.
Python's even slower than Perl, which is embarrassing.
Yeah, it's actually pretty much the worst-case scenario
for all the reasonable languages, yeah.
So yeah, in that talk, I dug into the details about why--
some of the reasons why that is,
and kind of the core of the in-body algorithm is this.
It's a few lines of code which basically calculate--
look at floating-point numbers, and it calculates--
does the big calculations.
So there's a lot of mathematical operations.
There's minus, divide, power, add, which is great,
and can all be done in line.
CPUs are very efficient at doing this
because CPUs natively understand floating-point numbers.
A number in C and a number in Python, these are not equivalent, right?
A floating-point number in C is probably eight bytes on the stack.
A floating-point number in Python is--
what is that, a pyFloat object that's 50 bytes and is out on the heap,
probably separated in space from the other numbers
in terms of it'll cause more cache misses and flushes
and all sorts of stuff, right?
Yeah, so a floating-point number in Python is an immutable object,
and it's basically a wrapper around a double.
So basically you have to create a Python object
to store the floating-point number,
and then if the value changes, you have to create a new one.
So the issue in in-body is that you have to create--
for one line of Python that just does a whole bunch of work
to get a single answer, like a single floating-point number,
all the interim values in that calculation create 18 objects,
which are immediately discarded.
Right, right, right.
So the memory management kicks in just constantly, yeah?
Yeah, and Python is pretty efficient at allocating small objects.
But when you magnify that to the level that is seen in the in-body problem,
then, yeah, that's why it's so slow effectively,
because it's creating all these temporary objects
and then destroying them in the next operation.
Yeah, so one of the things you can do
is maybe understand that there are numbers there
and treat them--
keep, say, the intermediate values as floating points
and only return the result to Python, right?
Like, okay, this Python runtime is going to need a pyint or a pylong
or a pyfloat or whatever,
but we don't need to do all the intermediate steps that way, right?
We could compute those in a lower-level thing
because we, again, understand the whole function,
not just understand multiply two numbers, multiply two numbers,
add two numbers, but that whole thing as a group, right?
Yeah, exactly.
So the principle behind some of the design ideas in Pigeon
is that--and in lots of other compilers.
This is not something I came up with.
But the idea is to try and keep things as efficient as possible
by just carrying values on the CPU registers
and then not allocating memory in the heap.
And a floating-point number fits in a CPU register.
So a 64-bit integer or a floating-point number fit in a CPU register.
So let's just carry those values on the registers
and then do low-level instructions to do addition and minus
and multiplication as well, but not divide
because I found out Python has a whole bunch of, like,
custom rules for division.
So I couldn't rely on the CPU instructions to do that.
So these are the types of things that, like,
well, maybe we could use this pep523 and some kind of JIT compiler
and turn it loose on this.
I just earlier this week interviewed Guido and Mark Shannon
about just general Python performance.
They're working on sort of a parallel branch of making Python faster,
which is great.
So out of the livestream, Josh Peek asks,
"Mark and Guido tease the potential of addition of a JIT to CPython 3.13.14.
Would this potentially intersect with that project?
Is this totally separate?
Do you have any visibility there?"
Yeah, I haven't asked to be involved in that yet.
I don't know if--
I mean, Mark Shannon's experience with compilers is, like,
miles ahead of mine, to be frank.
And, you know, Guido has invented the language,
so their knowledge surpasses quite substantially.
I hope that the work done in this project will be insightful
when they're designing the JIT.
And I've already spoken to both of them about this project
and walk through, like, what's working and what isn't.
And because it's, I guess, quite a bit ahead
and it's dealing with some challenges,
which they're probably going to hit when they come to this,
then, yeah, it will steer them in that direction.
Cool. Let's talk about compiling just for a bit.
Because I did a lot of C++,
and I remember pressing compile, the build button,
or the run, which would build and run,
and you would see it grind.
And actually, thinking back,
computers actually made noises.
They would, like, grr, grr, grr, you know,
like their hard drive would, like, make noises.
You would hear it compiling, even.
Yep.
Also in C#, .NET, compile, but less and much faster.
But in Python, it's just, it runs.
It feels like it just runs.
And I don't remember this compile step.
And yet, there is an aspect of compiling, right?
Yeah, it happens. You just don't see it.
So, yeah, it happens behind the scenes.
It compiles it, but it doesn't compile it into machine code.
It compiles it into bytecode.
Right, which is the same as .NET and Java,
but the difference is what happens to that bytecode next, right?
Yeah, it is similar.
But the Python bytecode is much higher level.
So there's, like, single operations
for just add two objects, for example.
Right, put this thing in a list.
Yeah, like add this thing to a list or merge two dictionaries.
It's like dict merge is a single bytecode instruction.
Whereas .NET uses a specification.
It's an open specification called ECMA335.
And this specification describes different stack types.
So it says, you know, there's like a 32-bit integer,
64-bit integer, 16-bit, et cetera.
There's floating point numbers,
which come in the form of four or eight byte floating point numbers.
And there's also things like booleans
and then how branches and evaluations work.
So it's closer to assembly.
But the reason you don't want to write things in assembly
is because assembly is specific to a CPU.
And you often find yourself writing instructions
which would only work on that particular CPU.
And then when you ship it to the real world,
like that doesn't work.
One of the big benefits of JIT
is it can look exactly at what you're running on and say,
oh, this has this vectorized hardware thing.
So let's use that version here, or this has this type of threading.
So we're going to do some sort of memory management around that.
Yeah, so C and C++ are ahead of time compilers.
They will interpret your code, parse it,
and compile it down into machine code instructions
and then put it in a binary format,
like a shared library or a standalone executable.
.NET Java and other languages
that have a JIT,
they have both a compiled VM,
which is something which has actually been compiled
into a standalone executable, which is the framework.
So the Java.exe, for example.
And then it could compile down the code
into an intermediary language and then evaluate that just in time
and then typically cache the machine code
onto a disk or into memory.
And it does that using a JIT.
And CPython interprets everything at runtime, essentially.
So it does cache the bytecode,
but it doesn't cache the machine code
because it doesn't compile to machine code.
And that's what Pigeon does.
If you've seen PYC files with the DunderPi cache,
down in theirs, that's the compiled output of Python.
But like you said, it's much higher level
and it gets interpreted after that.
Yeah.
So part of the insight of Pigeon is like,
well, let's take that compile step
and instead of outputting Python bytecode,
what if we output intermediate language bytecode?
Because there's a nice compiler hanging around that can compile that
if you could somehow feed it that IL instead of PYC content, right?
Yeah. So the steps are--
[laughter]
It's quite involved.
The steps are-- and I do go to this in the talk--
but Python code, abstract syntax tree,
code object which has Python bytecode,
and then Pigeon will basically compile Python bytecode
into .NET intermediary bytecode,
and then .NET will compile the intermediary bytecode
into assembly, into a machine code.
Then you attach that to, say, the function object
or a class or something like that, right?
Yeah, and then that bytecode is--
that machine code, sorry, is essentially an executable
which lives in memory.
And then when you want to call it, you just call that memory address
and it runs the function.
Just in the same way that you would load a shared library
and just call the address.
Right. You might have a .SO file,
and you import it and run it, and as far as you're concerned,
magically it just runs, right?
- Exactly. - Okay.
Is it slow? The compilation step in particular?
Not necessarily-- we'll get to the performance of the overall system,
but is this JIT step-- is this a big deal?
Does it take a lot of memory? What's it like?
I haven't actually focused too hard on the performance of the compilation step
because a lot of the problems I'm looking at are
compile once, execute 50,000 times,
and the overhead doesn't really matter that much.
Although it's pretty fast.
I've been really impressed.
Pigeon is written in C++,
and the compilation step is actually pretty quick.
The overhead is 10-15%
of the execution time on the first pass,
depending on the complexity of the function,
but if the function takes a second to run,
then .15 of a second is around how much it'll take to compile it.
- Okay. - Roughly.
Yeah, that's not bad. And then it goes faster.
Yeah, and then once it's done it once, that's it.
With the exception that Pigeon has a feature called
profile-guided compilation, which is something
that I designed to get around how dynamic Python is.
So JIT compilers are brilliant when you've got statically typed languages.
So if you know that this variable is an integer, and this variable is a string,
and this variable is an object,
then you can compile all the correct instructions.
In Python, variable A could be assigned as a string,
and then changed to an integer,
and then you can assign it to the return of a function,
which could be anything.
So one of the challenges I looked at was how do you actually make--
a JIT is only going to be faster if you've got optimizations,
and you can't make optimizations if you have to generalize everything.
So what it does is a feature called PGC,
which it will compile a profiling function.
So the first time it runs the Python code,
it's basically going to look at what variables are.
It's almost like you're doing a C profile on itself.
Yeah, so basically it compiles a function that runs,
and then when that function is running,
it captures a whole bunch of information about what's actually happening,
and then it makes some assumptions and says,
"Oh, when you were adding these three variables last time,
they were all integers, so let's optimize that for integers next time."
And if they do change, then it depends.
What happens if they change? Okay, crashing is an option.
You probably don't totally want to go with the crashing part,
but that might be an intermediate, like we're building it,
and it's getting dialed in.
Some options that come to mind is you could have an alternate compiled version
that says, "Okay, we've also seen this come as a string, int, int,
and so we're going to compile a separate one
and then do a lookup on the arguments and go from there."
Yes, they're called specializations,
and that's something that Mark Shannon talked about.
I think when CPython does its own JIT, they will definitely have specializations.
The downside is that you have a lot of memory overhead
if there are lots of specializations.
And a good example would be in the unit test module,
the assertEqual function.
This is pretty much the first one I kind of slammed into.
Pidgin tried to optimize the assertEqual function,
which could take anything.
It could take two strings, a string and a number.
The first question is, are they the same type,
or can they be coerced in the same type?
And then just keep going down these different cases.
It can't be simple.
It was actually a conversation with Guido.
He suggested looking at type guards.
So a type guard is--so before I go into the optimized code,
it will check to see, has the variable changed
from what it was last time it got profiled?
And then if it has changed type,
then it will default back into a generic path.
So that's essentially how it deals with different types.
Yeah, one of the fall-through paths could be just,
well, let Python have it.
Let Python just run the byte code.
Yeah, there are some things that Pidgin doesn't support.
Async and await is one major feature.
If it comes across asynchronous generators,
then it will just hand them back to Python,
and Python executes them.
So one of the big things--
It should be in there, though, right?
C# and .NET also have async and await.
I know that means quite a bit differently,
but theoretically, you're down the road
when you have more time, maybe.
It's not completely out of the world.
Yeah, I actually kind of started implementing it
and put most of it together, only to realize that
the APIs for asynchronous generators
are all private in CPython, so I can't import them,
which makes it technically impossible to implement,
which is a bit of a shame.
But yeah, that's one of the drawbacks at the moment,
is you can't do async and await.
Right, but if this were super successful,
I can see that that's like, "Okay, well, let's go ahead
and expose that, because Anthony's so close."
[laughs]
Yeah, they could probably maybe be coerced.
It's like a one-line code change, I think.
This doesn't apply to the profile-guided optimizations,
but one of the things that these frameworks have--
I know that .NET has had it at several levels.
They've got this ngen utility that will take
a .NET assembly in IL, and you can pre-compile it,
like ahead of time compile it,
and generate a native image on your machine.
And then Xamarin had that, because they had to have
something like this to get onto iOS,
where they ran the JIT compiler in advance and saved it.
Is that something that could potentially be done here,
or is it too much?
I watched this space.
I've been researching that.
That's kind of one of the things I've been looking into,
is can you compile it down into a format
which can be stored and then loaded or marshaled,
or can it be stored into a portable executable format
or some other binary format?
Lots of security implications there as well,
so that's one thing I'm cautious of.
I hadn't even thought about all the challenges you got there.
Yeah, that could be interesting.
But if it comes along that, yeah, this is pretty good,
but there's this slower startup, and I know something
that the core devs and Gio have been very protective of
is the startup speed of Python, right?
That they don't want it to start super slow,
because often it's run on a little tiny bit of
"do this tiny thing, and then we're going to drop back
and then maybe run Python again on this tiny thing,"
or even multi-processing, you know,
fork it, run these things, drop out of it.
So I'm just thinking of how do you protect,
how do you still achieve that goal and gain these advantages?
Yeah, I think there probably could be work done
to make the compiler more efficient.
Also, you can set the threshold of how many times
should a function be called before you JIT compile it.
So that's the threshold setting.
So if you call a function once,
there's probably no need to JIT compile it.
Well, there is no need to JIT compile it,
because you're compiling it and then just running it
straight afterwards, whereas if it gets called a lot,
then you would want to call it a lot.
And that's kind of where you get these things
called hot functions, which is a function which is run a lot.
You want to specialize and make more efficient, essentially.
So yeah, if you're, like, sorting a list, for example,
then doing comparisons between two different types,
you'd want to make that as efficient as possible,
and that would inherently make sorting algorithms quicker.
For sure. Yeah, so there's multiple stages here, right?
There's the uncompiled code or letting Python run the code.
Then there's compiling it with those hooks
to understand what types come in for the specialization.
And then there's generating the optimized version.
So if it's run once, at best you'll get the unoptimized compiled version.
And unoptimized compiled code is probably not that much better, right?
Yeah, there are some things that have been,
that it can do to optimize, for example.
There's a list of all the built-ins,
and it knows what return types the built-ins have.
So for sure, like, it knows if you run list as a built-in function,
then it will return a list.
And I have even put in a check
if somebody's overridden the list built-in, which is possible.
And you have to test that as well, which is interesting.
But yeah, it does make a whole bunch of assumptions like that,
which is generic and works in most code.
And for example, if you're accessing the fourth item in a list,
so you've got a list called names,
and in square brackets you put names, square bracket, the number three,
then three is a constant, so it can't change.
It's compiled into the function.
If the code knows for sure that names is a list,
then instead of calling a C API to see what it is
and get the index, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera,
the JIT compiler can go, "Oh, I already know this is a list.
I know the index you want is the fourth number."
So instead of calling all this stuff,
just calculate the memory address of the fourth item in the list
and then put in a little check to make sure
that there are four items in that list.
And then just compile that into the function,
and it's immediately significantly quicker.
Go to where the data is stored in the list,
go over by the size of four pointers,
so eight times four or something like that,
and just read it right there, something like that.
- Yeah, exactly. - Okay.
Assuming for sure that that's what it is, right?
- Otherwise-- - It sounds dangerous.
Yeah, exactly. This is some of the security things, right?
Go over some part in memory and read it, and then do something.
That sounds like buffer overflow when done wrong,
so I can see why you'd be nervous.
Yeah, exactly. But that's how compilers work.
You're dealing with memory addresses, essentially,
and low-level instructions.
Something we thankfully don't have to do a ton of in Python,
but in CPython, you're in C, right? That's a C thing.
Yeah, definitely. And when you're working with tuples,
you do that as well.
So you work out the address of the nth element
and then just use that address.
And increment the reference counter.
Also, don't forget that. Memory management breaks.
[laughs]
How interesting.
So where are you with this?
You said it's going to go to 1.0, which sounds like
I could install this and I could run it and--
- Yeah, so it's going to-- - It's magic, right?
It's going to 1.0.
Works only on Python 3.10.
That's one big thing.
Upgraded it from 3.9 to 3.10.
When 3.10 was released, actually,
and I won't be backporting it,
it's just so much has changed in Python and the APIs.
You can pip install it on Python 3.10.
You need to have .NET 6 installed
when that is released.
Or you can install release candidate 2, which is already out.
- And yeah, you can enable that. - That sounds like it's pretty close to done, right?
I don't know when it's actually, but they've got their .NET conference in--
what is that, six days? Surely.
Yeah, they say it launches then.
By the time this episode is out, it's very likely very close to just out.
So, okay, that's a pretty easy thing.
Can I brew install .NET? Do you know? I've not tried.
I don't know. That's a good question.
There is an installer for Mac.
Pigeon also works on ARM 64, which is worth noting.
And it's a very complicated detail of JIT compilers.
So, yeah, ARM support was no small feat.
But it's something that people just expected to be there.
Yeah. Well, there's obviously the M1s, right?
Everyone with an M1 would like--
who wants to do this would really like it to work on ARM.
But there's also Raspberry Pis and other places that Python shows up.
I don't know, helicopters on Mars. I don't know if that's ARM or not. Probably.
Yeah. So, I tested Linux ARM 64, which will be the Raspberry Pis and other.
And also Mac ARM 64.
I have not tested Windows ARM 64 because there is no Python for ARM 64 on Windows.
Okay.
Steve Dower has released a preview package of the libraries,
but not a standalone executable.
But it may come out in the future.
Yeah. That whole story--
No, but that whole story of Windows on ARM is--
I would love to see it better handled.
But it's like you can't even buy it, right?
Is it supported? It's provided to OEMs, but kind of, sort of.
I don't know. It's in a weird state, right?
It's not normal Windows. It's not super supported.
Yeah. I think, who knows?
I can't speak-- I do work for Microsoft, so I'm definitely not going to give my opinion.
Yeah. I'm not asking for your-- this is more me just making a proclamation.
I have Windows 11 running on my Mac Mini M1.
And it is running ARM.
But to get it, I had to go join the Insiders program and then install it.
And it's permanently got this, like, watermark that it's a tainted version,
but you can try to use it.
And, yeah, it works fine, but it's kind of sluggish and whatnot.
So, anyway, hopefully that comes along better.
So it sounds like it's supported on the various things.
I have .NET 6 installed and Python 3.10 installed.
Neither of those have to be messed with, right?
You've got the PEP for Python, and you've got just the legit--
Vanilla installations, yeah.
Yeah, that's beautiful.
And so give us a little walkthrough on, like, how we might use this.
What do I have to do to change my code to get these compilation steps?
So wherever your code starts running, you need to import Pidgin
and then call the enable function on Pidgin.
There's also a config function which configures different settings
in terms of how Pidgin runs.
Thresholds, for example, like how many times--
Yeah, the hot code threshold optimization level,
which is a level between 0 and 2,
which is how aggressive the optimizer is.
And you can also enable or disable the profiler.
Yeah. I remember in C, way back when I was doing C for projects,
there were these different optimization levels,
and it was like, "Well, you can go to 1 or 2,
and it'll probably still work.
If you go too far, it'll just crash."
Yeah.
It's like, "What's going on? I don't understand.
Okay, we'll dial it back until it's stable,
and that's as fast as we can make it go."
Yeah, this is my recommendation.
Go as high as you can without it catching fire.
[laughs]
Go with that.
So maybe start at 0.
No, it defaults to 1.
Yeah.
So yeah, don't turn it up to 11.
But yeah, and then the profiler is on by default,
which I may disable in the future
because the profiler probably causes the most issues
where you've got a function which ran with integers a thousand times,
and then all of a sudden somebody gave it some floating-point numbers.
It won't crash.
It will either fall back to default path
or it will raise an exception to say that it got some values
which it didn't expect.
And if you do see that, it'll tell you in the error message.
And it will suggest that you turn the profiler off
and then rerun the code.
For me, I feel like that would suggest to me
that maybe I should go check my code.
Yeah.
Not always, but often if I got something like,
"I'm trying to take these things and add them
and get what I think is the result,
and I'm trying to do math, not string concatenation,
and I get a string,"
chances are that's actually a mistake,
not something that I want to take account for.
It could be, but probably not.
Yeah, I actually saw a useful example of this yesterday on Twitter.
Somebody shared, "Adding two floating-point numbers in Python,
a and b, a plus b is not the same as b plus a."
They actually give different results, which is crazy.
But yeah, when you work with floating-point numbers and integers,
and you don't mean to, but you end up with different types,
you will get some weird results anyway.
Yeah.
So yeah, in terms of whether this will work,
I've compiled some pretty big libraries, and they've worked fine.
Pandas, Flask, Django,
chucked a lot of the CPython's test suite.
Yeah, this as well.
So yeah, it will run about 50,000 tests or something, I think.
That's pretty good.
Yeah, a lot of the CPython tests are testing specific internal things in CPython.
So some of them do fail, but it's not anything that Pigeon's done.
And pytest works as well.
So yeah, there's a lot of big libraries.
NumPy works fine.
There's tests for NumPy, tests for Pandas, tests for Flask, Django.
All the stuff that I'd expect people to try is in there.
If you're working with a lot of C extension modules, they also do work.
Cython extensions work.
So in terms of compatibility, that was one of the main things I wanted to focus on,
was instead of going super aggressive with the optimizations,
I just want to make sure this works with existing code,
because there are lots of other projects which--
We have PyPy already, PYPY, which is also a JIT compiler,
and it works not with the .NET backing the JIT,
but some of the hot functions getting compiled versus just running in Python.
That kind of stuff is pretty similar now, but they made the big tradeoff,
like we're going to just go all in on compiling,
and we're going to not necessarily integrate with the C APIs in the same way,
which means breaking with some of these things,
like NumPy or Pandas that people sometimes care about.
Yeah, and they also have to play catch up on the language features.
So if there's new features in 3.9, 3.10 in the language,
like new operators or whatever,
then PyPy has to then go and implement that, which is hard.
But Pidgin, you load it into CPython,
so in terms of language, it would be exactly the same.
Often a lot of those language features are just syntactic sugar over existing things, right?
Yeah, exactly.
And then if there's anything which is not compatible, like I mentioned,
async and await, then it will default back to CPython,
and that transition is seamless, and you won't notice.
It will just run the code regardless.
Awesome. So it looks like it works for the most part.
I haven't totally tried it, but it sounds like it works quite extensively.
The way you use it is you pip install Pidgin,
and then just import Pidgin, pidgin.enable is option one,
and then that's it, right? There's nothing else that you have to do?
Nothing else you have to do.
You just run the Python code, and it will just automatically spot stuff
that it should compile and compile it for you.
Fantastic. And then another option I see on the page here is I can say pidgin,
some Python file, and not necessarily modify the file, but tell it to execute.
What does it do? Import pidgin, pidgin.enable, eval?
Basically, yeah.
Yeah, basically, it's a very small script.
So yeah, Pidgin is a standalone command that you can run.
So instead of running Python, you run Pidgin against a script or a module,
and all the arguments should work as normal.
You also have the -m for built-in stuff, right?
Yeah, so if you want to run a script,
then you'd run Pidgin and then the name of the script.
If you want to run a module like pytest, for example,
then you would do pidgin -m pytest,
and it would run pytest with the JIT enabled.
Yeah, fantastic. Or Flask or something like that, right?
Yeah, exactly.
So I guess -m would work with external libraries, right,
as long as Python can see them.
Yeah, and I've shipped a Whiskey extension as well so that you can--
Yes.
--use it in Whiskey apps.
I think that that's an interesting use case, actually.
So when I run my regular Python code, it just loads up and runs.
But when I run Flask or FastAPI or Django or Pyramid or whatever,
there's all sorts of layers of indirection
or layers of not directly running it, right?
In production, you would say, "Hey, I want microWhiskey or gUnicorn to run this."
Like for FastAPI, it would be, "I want gUnicorn to run this,
but with uVehicorn workers and run five of them."
And like, boom, boom, boom, now you've described this chain of events, right?
Yeah.
But it sounds like there's, what, middleware to make this work still?
Yeah, it's a Whiskey middleware that is for Pidgin,
which will do the enabling and disabling.
Fantastic.
Required.
So that sounds like it works for any Whiskey app, Flask, Django, Pyramid, etc.
What about ASGI apps?
Due to the lack of async and await support, then no.
It doesn't really make much sense, right?
Because the big thing that it does is not the thing that's supported, right?
Yeah, I mean, if it's an async function,
then it will just give it back to CPython.
I'm sure there's a lot of synchronous things happening
in those various places, right?
Maybe the view method itself is async, but it might call a whole bunch of,
you know, "Get me the headers and the cookies," synchronously.
Who knows?
Yeah, exactly.
It also depends on the nature of the program
as to whether Pidgin's actually going to make a difference to the performance.
Yeah.
So that's kind of where I'm up to at the moment is different benchmarks
and running Pidgin against some standard benchmarks.
I showed the nbody execution time at my PyCon talk,
and that was 33% faster.
It's now 65% faster, so I've doubled that--
Oh, nice.
--gain.
So, however, most people aren't calculating the position of planets.
[laughs]
For the few who are, they're going to be super thrilled.
Yeah, for the few people who are, and are doing it in Python,
the system doing it in Python, yeah, then they'll be delighted.
So code which is doing a lot of math and is in pure Python would be faster.
Up to 20% fast-- 20 times-- not 20%, 20 times faster.
I've got some microbenchmarks that do simple calculus and stuff like that,
and they're 20 times faster with floating-point numbers.
And for, I'll say, small integers, because an integer in Python,
an int in Python is a--
It's an unbounded thing.
It's bounded by your memory, right?
Yeah, it's actually a list of digits.
So it can have an almost infinitely large number inside it,
whereas CPUs work with 32-bit or 64-bit numbers.
And the other languages, instead of keep growing, they just go,
"We broke, so instead of going one more, it goes to negative 2 billion."
Yeah. [laughs]
Yeah, you get funny overflows and stuff.
So one of the challenges I've had with Pigeon is trying to optimize integers,
but trying to understand where it potentially could be a very big number
and where the number is like 5.
What's 5 times 5?
You don't need to allocate half a meg of memory to do 5 times 5.
Yeah.
Yeah, so that's one of the challenges.
If you're working with integers and you're working with floating-point numbers
and you're doing a lot of math, then Pigeon will make a dramatic difference.
There's also a feature called the graph,
which will create .graphviz files for the functions that it's compiled.
And you can see this on the website.
So if you go to live.trypigeon.com--
Yeah, you've got this interactive live website, right?
Yeah, so I've made a live demo site where you can type Python code in
and click compile, and then it will show you--
Oh, don't change it, Michael. You'll break it.
[laughs]
Fine.
And then do compile.
Fine, I've got faith in you.
If not, I can delete it.
Look it!
It catches fire. Okay.
So that's the assembly that it has compiled that Python code into.
Okay.
And a fun thing I actually added was there's a comment in an assembly
which says which bytecode this is for, which is fun.
If you scroll down on the page, you see this graph.
I've got to do much scrolling.
That's the IR, and then keep going down.
Okay.
I think--there we go.
There we go.
I don't have a big enough screen there.
Here we go.
[laughs]
Okay, so this instruction graph gets generated if you enable graphing,
which is on the documentation.
But when you enable graphing, it will show you all the Python bytecodes
and then what values are being sent between those bytecodes.
So this is basically the output of the profiler.
It can see here that you've got A and B.
B was a float.
A is an integer.
And then it's doing a multiplication operation,
and it knows that if you multiply a float by an integer,
then the output is a float.
So it carries that value through the graph.
PyPy actually does things quite similar to this.
And then once the profiler has run, it will look at the graph
and then make some decisions about which values don't need to be Python objects.
So, for example, A times B--
These intermediate binaries here and stuff, right?
This in-place add, all those, yeah?
So, yeah, exactly.
So all of those values do not need to be Python objects.
So what it will do on the next pass is it will compile all of that--
recompile that, and then it will what's called unbox them.
So it basically just carries them in CPU registers as integers and floats.
And then instead of running the C function to add two numbers together,
it will just emit the assembly instruction to add two numbers on the register.
Yeah, that's fantastic.
That's what you're talking about where you don't have to drop back
into allocating Python numbers if you know for sure that no one's going to look at it.
It's just an intermediate value.
And this is where it gets tricky with integers, right?
Because A and B might be small, but A to the power of B might be larger.
Exactly.
And then it goes one step beyond as well if you have code that uses fast values.
It's tricky because when you do eval in the website,
it will never use fast locals.
But if you do have a function that has fast locals,
if it detects that that local is only ever used in places where it can be unboxed,
then it won't actually store the variable as a Python object either.
It will store it as a native stack value.
So that's something it even does.
Like if you have a variable called A and you assign it to the number two,
then it will actually just reserve an area in memory just to store that stack value.
And it will be an offset.
It's way more efficient.
Enormous, like thousands of times more efficient.
And when you refer to that variable in your function,
it will basically just access that point in memory to get the actual value.
Yeah, yeah, awesome.
This is really neat.
One of the things that stands out to me here is I wrote name equals Anthony plus Shaw as two strings.
And you're like, "Don't do it."
And yet what I see in the graph here is that it loads the string Anthony Shaw.
So did Python look at that and then decide that that's actually--
those are two constants, so we'll just make it one constant?
Or was that .NET?
Or what happened there?
Yeah, that's constant folding.
It's a feature of Python.
That's what I thought.
If you do two strings and a plus, it will actually compile those into one string.
You'd never see it.
Interesting.
Because they're statics, right?
Like it knows both of them.
Okay, very interesting.
So it sounds like for numerical stuff, this is quite a bit faster.
Did you do any tests on the web frameworks?
I mean, it's kind of appealing to say, "What if I could get Flask to kind of run natively?"
Yeah, I have.
Because when you look at what-- when you think about, "I'm writing this code to make this website go,"
most of what you're doing is you're doing like a little tiny bit of code on top of a big framework
that's doing most of the heavy lifting, right?
So if you could make Flask do that magic faster, or Django or whatever, that'd be cool?
Yeah, so the areas where Python is faster is numerical work.
Similar to PyPy, PyPy is a lot faster with numerical work.
It can make clear and simple assumptions and optimize based on the CPU.
So that's brilliant.
Areas where it's not faster or sometimes even slower is code,
which just uses a lot of classes and very small functions.
Partly just because of the way the path is designed, it will JIT compile functions.
And if your functions are just working with custom classes and you're passing things around,
then trying to decide what type things are and then how it can optimize types,
if everything is a Python-- custom Python object, custom Python class,
there's very little it can actually do to optimize.
Yeah, when you were talking about the specializations earlier,
it's one thing to say, well, I'm passing a customer and an order object,
but then they have fields themselves, each of which have potential types, right?
Like it's this object graph, this closure of all the object graphs,
and you've got to look at all those types you might touch, right?
Yeah, and then you've also got to check that that field exists, it's been set, it's not none.
By the time you've done all of that, you've basically just written what CPython would have done anyway.
But the difference is that if you JIT compile it, you've got to omit all those instructions.
And the JIT compiled function ends up being bigger because if it's compiled in C,
it just has one function that does that, that's shared by all libraries.
Whereas in the JIT, you have to make it so that it's their standalone functions.
So that's one downside is that if you're working with stuff,
which is similar to Django and Flask, I guess, like lots of classes,
lots of variables, which are all custom types,
probably not going to see a performance improvement or potentially it could even be slower.
And then the other one is...
Is it any transitive if I write code that runs in Flask, let's just pick one of them,
and I run Flask with Pidgin, will that then make all my code that Flask is executing also run in Pidgin?
Yeah.
Okay, so maybe if I was doing like highly computational stuff in my Flask app,
having to do that might be worthwhile.
Yeah, definitely. And in that case, you can just enable Pidgin before those functions,
or you can set the threshold to be higher.
That's sort of what makes more sense, I think.
Yeah. Okay.
The other area is strings.
So if you're doing a lot of work with strings, I haven't done any work on optimizing strings.
And I'm not particularly sure what you would optimize either,
because they're so complicated.
They are.
Because you're dealing all with Unicode, different encodings, different byte lengths.
Yeah, I don't even know how you would improve upon CPython's string implementation, to be honest.
Yeah, there's a lot of nuances to strings in all the languages, but especially in Python,
because you don't have to think about it, right?
The fact that you don't know how complicated Unicode is,
and word alignment and null characters and so on and so on.
Yeah, if you want a glimpse of how complicated it is, look at the Unicode object source file in CPython.
Is it big?
It's an absolute monster.
It is.
It's probably more complicated in C, actually.
Oh, my goodness.
All of that for emojis.
Okay, I understand there's other languages.
Oh, interesting.
So one thing I wanted to ask you about here, I was hunting around on the screen for it,
is it's cool that you can compile these things down and run them as native machine instructions
instead of piping them through C of L.C. as single line operations.
That's great.
But when I think of the stuff that compilers can do and JIT compilers,
it's a lot about the optimizations.
It's like I saw this function and this function, actually we're going to inline that one.
And this one we're going to rewrite this as some other thing that's going to be more efficient
because we're seeing that.
And so you do have some optimizations, right?
Like that's part of the magic?
Yeah, so I've kind of documented them as best I can on the Pigeon documentation.
There's a section called built-in optimizations, and I've given them all numbers.
And if it uses that optimization, it will flag the function to say,
oh, I'd use this optimization on this function.
And then in the documentation I'll explain what's the background, what was the idea,
what difference does it make.
You want to give some examples from some of these, like the is one, for example?
Yeah, so if you're using the is operator in Python, so if something is false,
actually you should probably use it.
Is none or something like that, yeah.
Yeah, is none.
Then it won't run the pyis function.
It won't run the CAPI to do an is comparison.
It will just look at the address of both objects and see if they're the same.
Because is is actually asking, are these objects the same, not are they equivalent, right?
So the same in CPython is the pointer addresses are equal.
Yeah, exactly.
So it will just compile that down to a simple pointer comparison.
That's actually one of the first ones I wrote, and it was good to learn.
Also, when it's doing comparisons for small numbers,
so Python inter, it kind of immortalizes numbers between, I can't remember.
Negative 5 and 256.
Yeah, that's it.
Because they use so much that --
Maybe 255, basically.
Yeah, it's around that many.
It immortalizes them and keeps them as constant objects so that they're just reused.
So if you create a new integer with the number 1,
it will just reuse the same number 1 that it used before.
Because they're not created on the stack.
They're complicated things on the heap.
So, yeah.
Exactly.
So if you do if something equals equals 25,
Pidgin will go, oh, well, I know 25 is an intern number.
So I'm actually just going to do a pointer comparison instead of a value comparison.
If the left-hand side is a number.
So there's little things like this.
Which makes small differences.
But when you add it up --
Yeah.
So I felt like -- I don't know where you are now from where you were when you spoke at PyCon.
But I feel like this is an area that people could contribute to.
This is an area for growth that doesn't require a lot of changes.
It could be super focused.
But if you see this situation, here's one more way to make it faster.
Absolutely.
So, yeah, this is one area where I was hoping that the research that I was doing
whilst writing Pidgin could contribute to other projects.
And I'm going to -- I've been talking to Carl Friedrich-Rosch as well, who works on PyPy.
And we're going to do some pair programming at some point.
To see kind of like how different projects work and stuff like that.
But kind of hopefully these optimizations can be learned from and then used when CPython gets to implementing its JIT.
Yeah.
Surely the .NET compiler has all sorts of optimizations in it.
Are you already taking advantage of those to some degree?
Yeah, some of, yeah.
By nature of letting it run, basically.
Yeah, some of those optimizers.
It does a lot of them already.
And I've been working with the compiler team on the .NET project as well.
Pidgin is one of the only projects to use the compiler directly.
Even though it can be used in that way, it's -- it wasn't -- I think it was designed to be run directly.
But it's not like advertised as an off-the-shelf JIT.
So, yeah, there aren't many projects that are using it in that way.
And I do work with the compiler team on specific test cases and stuff as well.
You have that advantage of being on the inside at Microsoft.
Even if you're half a world away, you still can get direct access remotely.
Which is like being down the street these days.
Yeah, I've said everything.
It's all been via GitHub, though.
So I think, as far as they're concerned, I'm just another name on GitHub.
But I don't -- it doesn't --
You might not even know, right?
I probably don't even know, yeah.
That I work there anyway.
Let's see. What else?
I think we pretty much have covered it, given the time that we got.
I think one -- another area that's interesting is, how does it compare to the other things that have been done before it?
Going along a parallel.
You do have a whole section on the readme on the GitHub page.
How does this compare to XYZ, PyPy, Piston, Numba, IronPython, and so on?
Do you want to maybe just have a quick statement about that?
Yeah, I think it's really hard to compare them.
So probably the most obvious ones to compare it with would be Cython, Numba, and PyPy.
So PyPy is a Python interpreter that has a JIT.
So it interprets, compiles, and runs Python code written in Python.
PyPy has been around --
It's like a form of Python that was rewritten to behave differently, rather than PEP 523, right?
Yeah, exactly.
So it's not -- CPython is written in C. PyPy is written in Python.
And probably significantly faster in many cases.
It's a very mature project.
But obviously there's limitations around C APIs, and some things don't work in PyPy.
Numba is a JIT-specific for NumPy.
So if you're using a lot of -- if you're using NumPy, then if you use Numba,
Numba can JIT-compile NumPy data arrays and stuff like that.
That's actually a very specific use case.
Right. That's great.
But if you're not doing NumPy, then not so great.
Yeah, in any other use case, it would make very little, if any, difference at all.
And then Cython is not a JIT.
It's an AOT compiler.
And it's a way of annotating Python code with concrete types.
And then it compiles them into C -- concrete compiles them into C extensions.
It's a little bit like what you're talking about, trying to understand what are these types,
and then can we create a specialization.
But it's the developer who just says, "No, these are integers.
This is a list. For sure. Go with it."
Yeah, down to the point where you actually specify the length of the integer as well.
So in Cython, you would say, "This is a 64-bit integer."
So that it knows that it can be converted into a 64-bit integer in C.
Pigeon is probably closest to Cython.
But obviously with Cython, you have to compile it to a C extension ahead of time.
Whereas with Pigeon, you just import it into Python and just turn it on,
and it just runs and compiles live.
Yeah, you don't have to have different compiled versions of your app or your library.
Not necessarily because of this, anyway, for the different platforms, right?
Yeah, and you don't have to annotate the code in this special syntax either.
Yeah. Well, let's close this out with a question on that.
So in Python, we've been able to say, optionally, that this thing is an integer,
you know, x colon int, or it's an optional integer, or it's a customer,
or whatever the heck it is.
We've had these type annotations, and traditionally they've meant nothing,
except for if you run tools against them.
On the other hand, we've had things come along like Pydantic, like FastAPI,
that look at that and go, "You know what? I'm going to do something with that,
because I got a string, because this is the web, and that's all I usually get.
I'm going to make that into an int, because you said it's an int."
Is there a scenario where type annotations play into this to enhance it somehow?
I'm against that idea, potentially.
I mean, that's how Cython works.
I think, and with type annotations as well, having a type checker is great
until the types are wrong, and it's not a fault of your own.
And having worked on strongly typed languages, like C#, C# is brilliant,
except when you need to do things like reflection.
So let's say you're working with JSON, like JSON data or YAML, for example.
And working with JSON and YAML in C# is incredibly hard, because you're like,
"Oh, I've had to do parsing YAML files in Java."
It's incredibly difficult, because you're like, "Oh, well, this could be a list
of strings, or it could be a dictionary where the key is a string,
but sometimes it's a number."
YAML is like that sometimes, and JSON is like that.
It's completely free.
So when you're working with dynamic content, using strongly typed languages
is extremely difficult.
It just gets in the way and just makes your life harder,
and Compilers just complains and just won't let you parse,
because it's saying, "Oh, well, that's not compliant with my view on the world."
With Python, I think it's cool to say, "Okay, if I just tag this as an integer,
then it should be able to optimize it for integers."
And I think that's what Mark was suggesting.
If it stops there, that's fine.
I think if it goes beyond that, then that's where things get
very, very complicated, and it just becomes a thing that's in the way,
being noisy, and it slows you down.
That's where I have a strong disagreement with it,
is that we use Python because it's fast to develop in,
and it's fast to develop in because if you know what you're trying
to get it to do, then the compiler doesn't really give you any grief.
It's as syntactic as, "Okay, I'll just try and run it."
Yeah, and I think the thing that's most similar to this is TypeScript.
My experiences with TypeScript have been often met with frustration.
I think it's really cool that you can write--
the language specification is really neat, but I want to use this library
and that thing and pull them together.
If that thing doesn't have the type specified just right,
I can't get JavaScript to pop out the other side
because the transpiler gives you a compiler error,
like, "This doesn't work right."
Well, no, it's going to work right.
Just let this little part go through.
I don't want to re-- I know there's ways to say this is just any and stuff,
but still, I feel like my experience was bumping up against that stuff,
even though it's kind of the same as Python type annotations in a lot of ways.
Yeah, and under the hood, it's still dynamic.
Yeah, exactly.
At runtime, it would still be the same thing,
but you won't get to the runtime because you can't get the stuff compiled.
Yeah, or it does really weird things at runtime that at compile time
you might have made assumptions that wouldn't happen.
All right, let me throw one quick thing out there before you pass final judgment
on this type thing, because you're right.
I could write a thing that says, "My function takes an int and a string,"
and I could run mypy against my code,
and sure enough, it only takes ints and strings in these situations.
But if it's a library, all bets are off.
There's nothing that says people who use your library are going to run mypy
and listen to that or do anything.
They could write Notepad if they had no self-respect.
But you could write whatever you want, and then you could just beat it on,
and then you'd have these problems.
That said, over on the Pydantic world, there is a validator,
a decorator called @validatearguments that will make sure at runtime
they really are a string and an int.
Yes.
Make you feeling better?
Probably not, because the transitive closure of objects is too complicated
to check.
I think the validate arguments is a convenience function.
It's there because you often have to validate user-provided data
that's coming in from an interface, like a web interface,
or an API of some sort.
So if people are submitting user-provided data,
then you want to have to validate the types,
and that is just a lot of boilerplate code, and it's annoying to write.
So let's just, as a convenience function, let's write this.
Right, probably because we're going to immediately try to convert it
in the next thing, right?
Yeah, exactly.
So I think it's quite different to using it internally
to make changes in terms of how the code is compiled.
For numbers, like I said, numbers and strings and base types,
I think is cool.
But for objects, like which fields do you assume exist?
Yes, exactly.
And then do they all have to match the types,
or just the two that you touch?
Yeah.
Like you've got an attribute there.
Sometimes it has a getter and a setter.
Sometimes it's just an attribute.
Sometimes it's a descriptor that inside the descriptor
is the thing you actually want.
Is that the right type?
Yeah, you're right.
It's insane.
Once you open custom types,
then it just kind of mushrooms into this.
Sure.
And that's why you see things like Cython and stuff
having little fragments of here's some limited code
that we're going to use, often fundamental types.
Yeah.
Cool.
All right, Anthony, this is really awesome.
I can tell you've done a massive amount of work on it.
There's more stuff I want to talk to you about,
but I think we're out of time.
Like calling into .NET, stuff like that.
But we'll save that for some other time, huh?
Yeah.
Until you have a little more progress.
Now, you know there's always the two questions
at the end of the show.
So if you're going to write some code,
what editor are you using these days?
VS Code.
Right on.
And notable PyPI library.
I mean, it could be Pigeon.
Anything else you come across?
Like, wow, this is awesome.
Yeah, I think I mentioned it before.
Tortoise, I'm a big fan of at the moment.
Yeah, Tortoise ORM.
Yeah, it's a nice async.
Tortoise.
ORM, yeah, very nice.
Yeah, and Beanie as well.
I'm really enjoying playing with Beanie as an ODM.
Yeah.
Async ODM on top of Mongo.
Yep.
Beanie is very cool.
I'm actually having Roman Wright on the show
to talk about Beanie not too far out as well.
And Beanie is cool because it's basically
Pydantic plus async and await on top of MongoDB,
which is cool.
Hmm.
And can I have three?
You can have three.
Yeah, I released like a small package called Hathi,
which is a SQL attack tool for Postgres, MySQL,
and SQL Server.
I'm looking at your GitHub profile here.
You've got one of these fancy profiles
with the new readme that shows up and all of your stars.
Look at this.
Yeah, like I made a custom graphic for everything.
Yeah, you did.
That's fantastic.
OK, what is this one called?
Hathi.
H-A-T-H-I.
I have too many repositories in GitHub.
I think I know.
It is a dictionary attack tool for Postgres, MySQL,
and MSSQL, Microsoft SQL Server, designed
for internal testing, of course.
Won't be bad.
Yeah, so don't break the law.
And yeah, I've been using it to test like internal--
well, not internal stuff, but test environments
and look at like bad passwords.
See if like an admin has a login, like password, password1,
or admin, or super user has a login, or whatever.
Yeah, and it was also a test of like async and await networking
and how fast I could make it.
It can do up to 120 login attempts a second.
So yeah, on my machine, but if you maybe--
this is a four core Mac, but yeah,
if you had a few more CPUs, you could probably
get a bit more than that.
But yeah, it'll go through a few thousand passwords.
And there's a password list in there as well of about 10,000
common database passwords.
Yeah, nice.
So yeah, just make sure your password is not on that list.
And if it is, you can raise a pull request to remove it.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You don't want--you still want to have your database open.
Like it doesn't get much worse than I just have read/write access
to your database, but that's what this would test for, right?
Yeah, yeah.
So you can scan a cluster or a machine and see if it can predict
what the username password is.
Yeah, cool.
All right, well, those are three great recommendations.
It's awesome to have you back on the show.
And congratulations on the work here.
Final call to action, you want people maybe to try Pidgin,
you want them to contribute, got other ideas.
What do you say?
Yeah, go to trypidgin.com.
And yeah, on trypidgin.com, you'll see at the top,
you can try it out live, link to documentation, link to download.
Yeah, I'd love more contributions or discussion, I think,
around what optimizations you could have and people using it
and checking it out.
And if you have any issues, you just raise them on GitHub
and I'll check them out.
All right, fantastic.
Well done, I can tell this is a ton of work.
So you've come really a long ways.
And congrats on 1.0 when it comes out in a few days.
Thanks, Michael.
Yeah, you bet.
See you.